utils/README.md, before:

# Test suite scripts

```sh
install.sh 
```
to install llvm

## Basic usage

These scripts are used to build programs of the LLVM test suite. They are
typically used as arguments to the `configure.py` script from the `testsuite`
directory. A test suite that builds all its programs with `O3.sh`, for
instance, is configured from the `testsuite` directory with:

```sh
% ./configure.py -d O3/ -s O3.sh
```

There is no need to reconfigure the test suite if `03.sh` is modified, but the
build will need to be cleaned.

## Provided test suite scripts

The default scripts are as follow:

* `O0.sh`, `O1.sh`, `O2.sh`, `O3.sh`:
  Compile the test program with `-O0`, `-O1`, `-O2` or `-O3` respectively.
* Lots of scripts are generated by the `configure-fast.py` script fro mthe
  `testsuite` directory to just apply a sequence of passes.
* The script `extractor.sh` compiles bitcodes and copies them to another
  external directory. This can be used to make a database of bitcodes.

## Writing test suite scripts

A test suite script can do anything with its input program, but eventually it
must compile it to an object file so that the Ninja target of the test suite is
updated and performance can be measured later.

Utility functions and variable definitions are provided in
`testsuite-scripts/tools/ts.sh`; it is heavily recommended to source this file
at the beginning of any test suite script. (Note: using `$0` is bad taste in
general but fine here because the rule rewriter of the test suite configuration
script sets the script name explicitly and with an absolute path.)

```sh
. $(dirname $0)/tools/ts.sh
```

What the test suite script must do is build `$in`, which is either a bitcode
file or a C/C++ source file, into `$out`, which is an object file. The trivial
way to do it, using the `ts.sh` utilities, is:

```
# Compile $in into bitcode
ts_compile

# Optimize the bitcode (optional)
ts_opt -O1 -whatever

# Assemble the bitcode to object code
ts_link
```

Which is exactly what happens in `Ox.sh`.

## Utility functions in `ts.sh`

TODO. Some have parameters, others don't.

Commit message:

update documentation for the install script

utils/README.md, after:

# Test suite scripts

## Automated LLVM builds

The `install.sh` script downloads and compiles a release of LLVM, along with
extra Clang tools and the LLVM test suite. Targeted version can be edited in
the code. If the script is interrupting, restarting it will gracefully resume
the build.

```sh
% install.sh 
```

The script can normally be used to rebuild after editing source files, but
don't take my word for it. Just run `ninja` in the `llvm` directory.

## Basic usage

These scripts are used to build programs of the LLVM test suite. They are
typically used as arguments to the `configure.py` script from the `testsuite`
directory. A test suite that builds all its programs with `O3.sh`, for
instance, is configured from the `testsuite` directory with:

```sh
% ./configure.py -d O3/ -s O3.sh
```

There is no need to reconfigure the test suite if `03.sh` is modified, but the
build will need to be cleaned.

## Provided test suite scripts

The default scripts are as follow:

* `O0.sh`, `O1.sh`, `O2.sh`, `O3.sh`:
  Compile the test program with `-O0`, `-O1`, `-O2` or `-O3` respectively.
* Lots of scripts are generated by the `configure-fast.py` script fro mthe
  `testsuite` directory to just apply a sequence of passes.
* The script `extractor.sh` compiles bitcodes and copies them to another
  external directory. This can be used to make a database of bitcodes.

## Writing test suite scripts

A test suite script can do anything with its input program, but eventually it
must compile it to an object file so that the Ninja target of the test suite is
updated and performance can be measured later.

Utility functions and variable definitions are provided in
`testsuite-scripts/tools/ts.sh`; it is heavily recommended to source this file
at the beginning of any test suite script. (Note: using `$0` is bad taste in
general but fine here because the rule rewriter of the test suite configuration
script sets the script name explicitly and with an absolute path.)

```sh
. $(dirname $0)/tools/ts.sh
```

What the test suite script must do is build `$in`, which is either a bitcode
file or a C/C++ source file, into `$out`, which is an object file. The trivial
way to do it, using the `ts.sh` utilities, is:

```
# Compile $in into bitcode
ts_compile

# Optimize the bitcode (optional)
ts_opt -O1 -whatever

# Assemble the bitcode to object code
ts_link
```

Which is exactly what happens in `Ox.sh`.

## Utility functions in `ts.sh`

TODO. Some have parameters, others don't.
